# Amazon Kinesis Client Library for Haskell

This package provides an interface to the [Amazon Kinesis Client Library][amazon-kcl] (KCL) [MultiLangDaemon][multi-lang-daemon] for Haskell.

Developers can use the KCL to build distributed applications that process streaming data reliably at scale. The KCL takes care of many of the complex tasks associated with distributed computing, such as load balancing across multiple instances, responding to instance failures, checkpointing processed records, and reacting to changes in stream volume.

This package wraps and manages the interaction with the *MultiLangDaemon*, which is provided as part of the [Amazon KCL for Java][amazon-kcl-github] so that developers can focus on implementing their record processing logic.

A record processor in Haskell typically looks something like the following:

```haskell
module Main where

import           Control.Exception.Safe (handleAny)
import qualified Data.Text as T
import           Network.AWS.Kinesis.Client

main :: IO ()
main =
  handleAny (kclPutStrLn . T.pack . show) $
    runKCL initialise processRecords shutdown
  where
    initialise InitialisationInput{..} =
      -- Initialize the record processor
      undefined
    processRecords ProcessRecordsInput{..} =
      -- Process a batch of records from _priRecords, and optionally checkpoint by calling
      -- _priCheckpointer
      undefined
    shutdown ShutdownInput{..} =
      -- This is called when the KCL is being shutdown, and if desired the record processor
      -- can checkpoint here by calling _siCheckpointer
```

For more information about [Amazon Kinesis][amazon-kinesis] and the client libraries, see the
[official documentation][amazon-kinesis-docs] as well as the [Amazon Kinesis forums][kinesis-forum].

## Getting started


### Set up your AWS credentials

TODO
<!-- Instead, you can provide your credentials through environment variables (**AWS\_ACCESS\_KEY\_ID** and **AWS\_SECRET\_ACCESS\_KEY**) or a [credential profile][aws-sdk-dotnet-credentials] in your home directory. -->

### Building and running the sample projects

In addition to source code for the Amazon KCL for Haskell itself, this repository contains a sample application, which can serve as a starting point for your KCL application.

The sample application consists of two projects:

<!-- * **A data producer**  
This program creates an Amazon Kinesis stream and continuously puts random records into it. There is commented-out code that deletes the created stream at the end; however, you should uncomment and use this code only if you do not intend to run SampleConsumer. -->

* **A data processor** (_sample-app\\Main.hs_)  
A new instance of this program is invoked by the *MultiLangDaemon* for each shard in the stream. It consumes the data from the shard. If you no longer need to work with the stream after running SampleConsumer, remember to delete both the Amazon DynamoDB checkpoint table and the Kinesis stream in your AWS account.

The following defaults are used in the sample application:

* **Stream name**: _my-test-stream_
* **Number of shards**: _1_

### Running the data producer

To run the data producer, run the *sample-app*.
#### Notes

### Running the data processor

Because the Amazon KCL for Haskell requires the *MultiLangDaemon*, which is provided by the Amazon KCL for Java, a bootstrap program has been provided. This program downloads all required dependencies prior to invoking the *MultiLangDaemon*, which executes the processor as a subprocess.

To run the processor **install the sample app**, then **run the bootstrap project** with the following configuration:

```bash
> stack install kcl-sample-app
> stack exec kcl-bootstrap -- --properties ./sample-app/kcl.properties --execute
```

#### Notes

* You must have [Java][jvm] installed.
* If you omit the `--execute` argument, the bootstrap program outputs a command that can be used to start the KCL directly.
* The *MultiLangDaemon* reads its configuration from the `kcl.properties` file, which contains a few important settings:
  * **executableName = kcl-sample-app**  
    The name of the processor executable.
  * **streamName = my-test-stream**  
    The name of the Kinesis stream from which to read data. This must match the stream name used by your producer.
  * More options are described in the [properties file][sample-properties].

### Cleaning up

This sample application creates a few resources in the default region of your AWS account:

* A Kinesis stream named _my-test-stream_, which stores the data generated by your producer
* A DynamoDB table named _HaskellKinesisSample_,  which tracks the state of your processor

Each of these resources will continue to incur AWS service costs until they are deleted. After you are finished testing the sample application, you can delete these resources through the [AWS Management Console][aws-console].

## What you should know about the MultiLangDaemon

The Amazon KCL for Haskell uses the [Amazon KCL for Java][amazon-kcl-github] internally. We have implemented a Java-based daemon, called the *MultiLangDaemon*, which handles all of the heavy lifting. Our approach has the daemon spawn the user-defined record processor program as a sub-process. The *MultiLangDaemon* communicates with this sub-process over standard input/output using a simple protocol, and therefore the record processor program can be written in any language.

At runtime, there will always be a one-to-one correspondence between a record processor, a child process,
and an [Amazon Kinesis shard][amazon-kinesis-shard]. The *MultiLangDaemon* ensures that, without
any developer intervention.

In this release, we have abstracted these implementation details and exposed an interface that enables
you to focus on writing record processing logic in Haskell. This approach enables the [Amazon KCL][amazon-kcl] to
be language-agnostic, while providing identical features and similar parallel processing model across
all languages.

## See Also

* [Developing Processor Applications for Amazon Kinesis Using the Amazon Kinesis Client Library][amazon-kcl]
* [Amazon KCL for Java][amazon-kcl-github]
* [Amazon KCL for Python][amazon-kinesis-python-github]
* [Amazon KCL for Ruby][amazon-kinesis-ruby-github]
* [Amazon KCL for Node.js][amazon-kinesis-nodejs-github]
* [Amazon KCL for .NET][amazon-kinesis-client-net]
* [Amazon Kinesis documentation][amazon-kinesis-docs]
* [Amazon Kinesis forum][kinesis-forum]

[amazon-kinesis]: http://aws.amazon.com/kinesis
[amazon-kinesis-docs]: http://aws.amazon.com/documentation/kinesis/
[amazon-kinesis-shard]: http://docs.aws.amazon.com/kinesis/latest/dev/key-concepts.html
[amazon-kcl]: http://docs.aws.amazon.com/kinesis/latest/dev/kinesis-record-processor-app.html
[amazon-kcl-github]: https://github.com/awslabs/amazon-kinesis-client
[amazon-kinesis-python-github]: https://github.com/awslabs/amazon-kinesis-client-python
[amazon-kinesis-ruby-github]: https://github.com/awslabs/amazon-kinesis-client-ruby
[amazon-kinesis-nodejs-github]: https://github.com/awslabs/amazon-kinesis-client-nodejs
[amazon-kinesis-client-net]: https://github.com/awslabs/amazon-kinesis-client-net
[multi-lang-daemon]: https://github.com/awslabs/amazon-kinesis-client/blob/master/amazon-kinesis-client-multilang/src/main/java/com/amazonaws/services/kinesis/multilang/package-info.java
[DefaultAWSCredentialsProviderChain]: http://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSJavaSDK/latest/javadoc/com/amazonaws/auth/DefaultAWSCredentialsProviderChain.html
[kinesis-forum]: http://developer.amazonwebservices.com/connect/forum.jspa?forumID=169
[master-zip]: https://github.com/awslabs/amazon-kinesis-client-net/archive/master.zip
[aws-sdk-dotnet]: http://aws.amazon.com/developers/getting-started/net/
[aws-sdk-dotnet-credentials]: http://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSSdkDocsNET/latest/DeveloperGuide/net-dg-config-creds.html#net-dg-config-creds-creds-file
[aws-console]: http://aws.amazon.com/console/
[sample-properties]: https://github.com/seek-oss/amazon-kinesis-client-haskell/blob/master/sample-app/kcl.properties
[visual-studio]: http://www.visualstudio.com/
[jvm]: http://java.com/en/download/
